--- 
layout: post
title: "Linguistic economics/Economic linguistics"
date: 2019-08-09
---

#### A short overview of this emerging interdisciplinary field

In which interesting ways economics and linguistics intersect? What these two disciplines have to gain by deepening an up to now very superficial dialogue? 

With these questions in mind I explored a bit the existing literature about it. What came out of this short exploration is: **Both economics and linguistics are interested ultimately in how we make decisions and interact with each other, creating complex social structures on the way. Because of that, both disciplines have many analogue structures and the insights of one of them may help the other to further develop.** 

One can be studied by the point of view of the other, but they also can work together in a more symbiotic way. Additionally, in the last decades, they both gained important new insights from psychology, with the development of behavioral economics, on one hand, and cognitive linguistics, on the other. One might even try to put them both disciplines under the umbrella of cognitive sciences.

But there is a lot of other exciting intersections. When economics try to see linguistics as an object of study, we have economics of language. Its goal is to understand how the languages someone speaks — with all theirs underlying linguistic structures — affects his or her economic behavior. One controversial article on this subject published was in the American Economic Review in 2013 [(1)](#references). It tries to associate a stronger demarcation of time passage with a weaker future-oriented behavior, i.e., fewer savings. The paper raised critics both of econometricians, who pointed out to methodological flaws, and linguistics, who said the article oversimplifies complex language structures. However, it surely has its merits by putting this debate in the spotlight. 

On the other side of the universe of language and economics – term proposed in 2012 by two economists [(2)](#references)-, linguistics also sometimes try to study economics by its eyes. From what I’ve seen, most articles on this make a textual analysis of economic articles and discourses, trying to understand how some communicative choices reveal underlying ideas and conceptions that economists have when trying to make sense of the world. [(3)](#references) [review] 

Some specialists in both areas also point out to similarities in evolutionary linguistic theory and evolutionary economic theory [(4)](#references). In a process comparable to biological evolution, languages develop in an adaptive way. The same occurs with economical institutions and behavior. 

**Narrative Economics** 
 
I think this might be the most interesting econ/ling intersection. Robert Shiller, one of the 2013 Nobel Prize laureates in Economics, published in 2017 a 58-page-long article about ‘Narrative Economics’, which he defines as “the study of the spread and dynamics of popular narratives, the stories, particularly those of human interest and emotion, and how these change through time, to understand economic fluctuations.” [(5)](#references) I think one could loosely sum up this already concise definition as “linguistics applied to macroeconomics”. Using basic models of viral diseases proliferation, Shiller argues that ideas and concepts – from Laffer’s curve to Rubik’s cube – spread in the same way. 

In the article, Shiller asks himself why hasn't modern economics been capable of satisfactorily explaining crises as the the Great Depression in the United States. For him, the answer partially lies in the fact that economists don't pay enough attention to the narratives inside people heads when these economic downturns happen. And, when they do, it often is misfocused. For instance, economists have paid too little attention to the housewives' point-of-view while the Great Depression was taking course, in spite of the fact that managing the handling the household purchases was a woman's job in the 20s and 30s. Not understanding how those women made purchase decision means not understanding the slow recover of private spending and reasons behind the severity and duration of the crisis. 

In the second semester of 2019, Shiller is expected to release a book titled (guess what) Narrative Economics, in which he probably will further develop his ideas and present it to a broader public. 
 
I think it is important to remark: While, surely, the connection Shiller is proposing appears and, in many ways, is novel to the economic mainstream, he is not one of the first social scientists to talk about it. Four decades ago, Pierre Bourdieu wrote an article called The Economics of Linguistics Exchanges. [(6)](#references) In it, Bourdieu puts linguistic exchanges as another way that power dynamics in society plays out. For him, language is one of the many cultural capitals that people use to pursue economic and symbolic profit)

**Natural Language Processing** 

There is also growing interest in Natural Language Processing (NLP) applied to economics and finance. For instance, a practical problem on this may be: how a series of controversial Elon Musk's tweets affects Tesla’s stock price? In 2018, the first conference on Economics and NLP was held in Melbourne [(7)](#references). One of the nine papers that were presented in the event deals exactly with the relationship between sentiments expressed on Twitter and stock market fluctuations. 

The development of NLP techniques allows economists to better explore vast text databases. Until recently, this has been restricted to naive quantitative approaches to studying language, which ignores the complexity of semantics. Clearly, the development of new theoretical frameworks (like Shiller's narrative economics) is necessary to economics take full advantage of this revolution.

#### **References** 

(1) [The Effect of Language on Economic Behavior, Keith Chen, 2013](https://www.anderson.ucla.edu/faculty_pages/keith.chen/papers/LanguageWorkingPaper.pdf)

(2) [How can Language be linked to Economics? A Survey of Two Strands of Research, Zhang & Grenier, 2012](ideas.repec.org/p/ott/wpaper/1206e.html)

(3) [Keywords: The New Language of Capitalism, 2018, John Patrick Leary](https://theoutline.com/post/6739/keywords-book-review-language-of-capitalism?zd=2&zi=2q6vbvhb&fbclid=IwAR1em-rys7DgycPs-V9FMw74ysyNVVx08g8yNNly1g43MoYu14bDXuvHQ38)

(4) [Evolutionary Linguistics and Evolutionary Economics, Hashimoto, 2006](https://link.springer.com/article/10.14441/eier.3.27) 

(5) [Narrative Economics, Shiller, 2017](http://csinvesting.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/NarrativeEconomics_preview.pdf)

(6) [The economics of linguistic exchanges, Bourdieu, 1977](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/053901847701600601?journalCode=ssia) 

(7) [Economics and Natural Language Processing, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018](https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W18-3100)

